All right, let's do this.
Hi, everyone.
Thanks for being here.
Who's here?
My friends?
My colleagues?
Great.
Okay.
I am Tessa.
I am the CEO and co-founder of Germ Network.
I'm here with my founding engineer, Anna, who I hope many
of you will get to meet.
If you have technical questions, you should really ask her and not
me.
We build an end-to-end encrypted messenger that lets you log
in with social handles instead of a phone number.
Germ supports multiple identities, and at proto is our first and maybe
most important stop.
Germ now launches from your blue sky, black
sky, and other at proto profiles.
So thousands of you have used it since we integrate it into
your blue sky profiles.
Thank you for sharing your feedback in the last few weeks, and
to the app proto developers who are already implementing the germ button
in your app views for your users.
Thank you.
We have a lot of work to do, but we are ready
to be your secure messaging app for the atmosphere and beyond.
Come find Anna and I at 9:00 AM tomorrow morning in
the lounge, the like round lounge upstairs.
We're going to play with germ, and we would love to
hear your feedback.
And I have one green germ hat to give away.
So my co-founder and CTO, Mark, is watching from home
in LA.
Hey, Mark, we miss you.
Mark and I met on Twitter.
I was a social media scholar with a theory about the centr
ality of messaging to social.
And Mark was the ex-Apple iMessage and
FaceTime privacy engineer who left to replace the phone number.
It's hard to believe that a year ago, he and I
came to Seattle for AtConf as perfect strangers to everyone here
because we had just started integrating AppProto into our messaging
app.
That weekend, we had some exciting conversations about privacy and private data
that a year later are bearing so much fruit.
And even at Germ, as we're focused on building end-to-
end encrypted channels for your AppProto handles, we're also
really interested in private data, both as developers who might use it
and also as users and as citizens of this ecosystem who care
about the future of social networking.
But today, I don't want to talk about privacy.
I want to talk about consent.
In this community, we talk a lot about openness, self-determination,
privacy, and choice.
These are North Star values that orient us around what we're
building.
But these words fundamentally each describe a position of the self.
I am open or private.
I have choices.
But as soon as I tell you what to do, these terms
collapse.
Consent is the missing principle here because consent is a principle
of relationality.
Relationality is hard because it's dynamic.
It demands continual negotiation.
But it's also strong because it produces consensus.
Consent is scalable because it extends from a two-person relationship
to the relationship of people to their government and to their social
rules and norms.
Caring about consent translates to movement coherence and political durability.
Building consensual systems is building systems to last.
And I think that's what we're all trying to do
here.
It's also simply the price of healthy relating.
And I believe that every single person at this conference builds technology
to serve human flourishing, choice, and community well-being.
We're all building the future that we want to live in.
So today, I want to offer us that consent is and should
be one of the core guiding values that we unite around to
reach our goals.
I want to offer consent as a resource.
Consent is a concept that you can return to when you
're setting goals, designing products, and engaging with users.
Also known as other people.
This talk is not graphic, but I do just want to give
a trigger warning that I will mention interpersonal and sexual violence.
So please take care of yourself.
So the internet that most of the world lives in today is
characterized by surveillance and control.
That's why we're building the alternative, right?
Modern social media is a gilded cage where people trade
their information, relationships, attention, and ultimately freedom of thought for a steady
drip of content that promises connection like a carrot that you can
never quite reach.
Over 6 billion people are on the internet and 4 billion human
beings are using meta products every single month.
These are the people that we're trying to recruit to the
atmosphere.
We've lived in meta social internet for 20 years, and I
thought it would be fun to remind us how it started.
A Facebook for the younger folks here used to be a kind
of yearbook that colleges would distribute at the beginning of the
school year to help undergrads make friends.
Because it's always natural for us to look for each other.
So in the early 2000s, Harvard made these digital.
There are 12 residential houses on campus, like big dorm complexes, and
they each had their own private online Facebook.
So Mark Zuckerberg, when he was an undergrad, hacked into each
one.
He downloaded every single image of an undergraduate woman at Harvard and
fed them into a hot or not style website that he then
distributed.
Luckily for him, the president of the school at the time was
this guy.
Zuck received zero discipline for hacking school IT systems and sexually
harassing every single undergraduate woman on campus, which probably included min
ors.
He was able to build and launch Facebook with campus resources, got
to drop out of his own free will, and then this guy
wired him $500,000.
In the 20 years since, he's built so many beautiful businesses
that all of us around the world get to enjoy today.
Today, the way 70 to 80% of Americans feel about how
companies and the government handle our data is distrust, lack of
control, and confusion.
This is a picture of authoritarianism that predates our current
administration.
Social media has connected the world, but it has also traumatized
the world.
We want to talk to anyone, we don't want to talk
to everyone.
It's time for us to build new products with the love
and tenderness that make it safe and easy for people to
trust us and depend on us for the rest of their lives.
Luckily for us, consent is a renewable resource that we produce ourselves.
Defined simply, consent is agreement to what someone else proposed or
is doing that involves you.
In fact, it's a concept with a thousand-year history that
bridges contract law, political theory, sexual health, human rights, and data policy.
So whether you're talking about consenting to a contract, to
being governed, to sex, to data collection, it's all the same
idea.
So it's obviously a hugely important concept.
In the 1990s, anti-rape activists on college campuses pushed
the theory of consent into affirmative consent, which from there moved into
law.
Affirmative consent has five parameters.
It's voluntary, so of course, it's freely given, it's
informed, people need to understand what they're consenting to.
It's revertible, it's reversible, which means it's
continually given and you can withdraw it.
It's specific, so consent is to a specific ask, it's
not a blanket permissiveness.
And finally, it's unburdensome, it's easy
to give, otherwise it's not really accessible.
But in the context of software, consent has remained really shallow.
Permission screens, cloud, are access to information and services, and we
're coerced into consenting.
That's not, that's not the deal.
In 2021, human-computer interaction scholar Jane Im challenged us to
apply the most current theories of consent to how we design social
media features.
She has this extraordinary table where she categorizes or generates social
media features across the five categories of affirmative consent.
This table is an actual laundry list of the best features that
we've been begging platforms for for 20 years.
It includes a lot of the stuff that we're working on
here in the atmosphere, like algorithmic choice and account labels, the
ability to disconnect posts from their engagement.
It is also extremely generative, with new ideas for automation and
organization and personalization.
The first line of this chart is DMs.
It has some really awesome feature ideas that we've talked about
at Germ when we think towards group chats, automations, and productivity
features.
And Germ's agentive multi-identity technology is going to
make some of this really easy.
Like automations based on who you're talking to and who
they know you as.
But consent in messaging starts earlier than that, because a DM is
the minimum viable product of a digital relationship.
The same way a two-person connection is the smallest unit of
a community.
So let's talk about Germ.
We've heard a lot about App Proto ethos.
We also have a Germ ethos.
I resonated so strongly last year to Paul Frazee's
talk on Blue Sky's theory of change.
Germ is similar to Blue Sky in that we are also a
product built on top of an open protocol.
Our protocol will always be interoperable, open source, and free.
And we'll build our business through our product or products.
We also believe that the way to grow how many people we
serve is to compete as a consumer startup.
So we're a public benefit corporation that's using growth capital
to build our business.
But if the AT protocol is locked open, Germ's protocol is
locked consensual.
Germ starts from the technological equivalent of a human rights posture.
That you, each of you, are a self-sovereign individual
with inalienable rights to your personhood, which in
the digital realm is expressed as data.
From that foundation, you have the power to identify yourself and to
form relationships expressed as sharing data.
Each relationship you form is unique, is double opt-in, and a
single opt-out.
Our protocol is an authentication layer on top of the messaging
layer security protocol for end-to-end encrypted messaging.
So the relationships that you opt into on Germ exist in a
completely private session between you and the person you're talking to.
You choose to talk to someone, also known as sharing data in
real time with them, and you're only sharing it with them.
So this is cryptography in the service of how we really
form and dissolve human relationships.
End-to-end encrypted messaging started off centralized.
Both parties have to be on the same service, and you send
encrypted messages addressed to and from the identities of the two parties.
Historically, those have been phone numbers, but in recent years, those
have been things like crypto wallets.
Germ decentralizes authentication with our novel protocol, which is inspired by
Double Ratchet.
Double Ratchet is the gold standard of end-to-end encrypted
messaging, and it updates encryption keys with each message sent.
Similarly, our protocol updates identity and transport when you message people.
This gives us a powerful primitive that breaks free of fixed identities
and centralized services.
Our protocol frees end-to-end encrypted communication from phone numbers.
So that you can communicate as multiple agentive identities.
So we're building secure messaging beyond phone numbers.
There's a theory of relationship here.
If a message is the MVP of a digital relationship, that means
we're only connected if we're communicating.
There aren't inactive follows on Germ.
The connection starts only when I send you a message.
Identification is part of communication, not separate from it.
When I talk to you, I identify myself to you.
It's the first thing that I share and not before.
Like Krishnamurti said, I cannot exist in myself.
I only exist in relationship.
On Germ, you don't exist without your relationships.
The coercive internet is based on a very dark view of
humanity.
That we can only be tricked into engaging with each other.
The history of the world would beg to differ.
At Germ, we're idealists, but we're also realists.
So many of us lately at this conference and online beforehand have
been talking about how we need to make our products effortless
and inviting.
Like I used to tell my students, you can't follow your
paper around explaining what you meant to say.
As Tony Cade Bambara says, the role of the
artist is to make revolution irresistible.
At Germ, our goal is to make exercising your autonomy feel effort
less and fun, even viral.
And so the core UX challenge of our app is making it
easy and intuitive to talk to your friends with your handle.
While placing authentic moments of friction in the right places.
We tried not to reinvent the wheel where messaging works well, but
innovate significantly in the context layer with our creation of cards.
Cards are how we represent your cryptographic identities in Germ.
You can use cards without app proto.
You just build one and share a link or a QR code
with someone else to chat.
Under the hood, that is decentralized authentication, but most users don't
care.
You can build multiple cards and each version of every card you
share is operating a separate cryptographic mailbox, all presented to you
in one unified inbox.
As we integrated app proto, we navigated new dimensions of how
our users grant and withdraw consent.
Germ's burner cards are totally local, but your app proto card
is connected to this busy outside world.
You pull your profile data in from app proto and you can
push things back out like blocks.
We already present your products.
We already present your app proto card differently from your local cards,
but I expect that as our app matures, our design system
will highlight where your cards and relationships came from.
All relationships on Germ are two-way, but app proto doesn't
have friends, it has one-way followers.
If Germ is invite-only messaging, when you link your app proto
handle, you're opening up a wider invitation of who can talk
to you.
But even there, we don't assume.
We use the logics of consent to reason about how to
bring app proto connections into Germ.
If you follow someone on app proto, you opted into connecting with
them.
So they can double opt-in back to you by messaging you
on Germ.
And all across the atmosphere, we're seeing the Germ button showing
up on your friend's profile.
Just click it and start chatting with them in an end-to-
end encrypted channel.
And we hear you asking for open DMs.
You're ready to consent to that.
And that's a future feature.
Because consent is informed, we want to make sure that our users
always know what they're sharing with who.
Because it's specific, we want them to have granular control over
how they can be contacted.
So you decide whether you want the people that you follow on
app proto to be able to message you at all, or whether
you want to reserve the right to send the first message, and
whether a button to Germ DM should display in app views.
Because it's unburdensome.
If you chat with someone, if you want to chat with someone,
if you can chat with someone, excuse me, you see a button
on their profile, and you simply click it to start chatting.
And this is the fun part about consent.
People get mad when they don't have access to your permission
to hang out with them.
But to the people that you consent to be in relationship with,
it's the best party in the world.
Germ relationships are separate from app proto relationships.
So once you start messaging on Germ via your app proto cards,
you can, for example, unfollow each other out there, and you
'll still be connected in Germ.
You can even disconnect your blue sky account, or your black sky
account, and you still can keep talking on Germ.
Right now, you add Germ friends one at a time from another
app.
But we're working to show your app proto social graph inside
of Germ, so that you can have a more complete and easy
messaging experience.
In designing this new feature, we wanted to help people understand that
your app proto connections aren't your Germ connections, until you send
them a message.
You can also dismiss seeing people in the app, like in other
suggested friends features.
So Germ is not just a messenger for app proto the way
Signal is a messenger for your phone contacts.
Instead, our protocol is an invite-only layer, with a doorway that
you can open to app proto as wide as you want.
You're always in charge of who gets the keys to talk
to you.
Messaging has become crowded and spammy.
We're empowering you to rebuild the network of who you actually
want to talk to, with the identities that you already know them
as.
I want to close with a postscript for a solar punk
future.
Double Ratchet is known as the Axolotl algorithm,
because it is cryptographically self-healing, the way the
Mexico City salamander, the Ajolote, from Nahu
atl, Ajolotl, is self-healing.
When LDF was Tetnotichlan, it was a sustainable
city on a lake in a volcanic mountain basin, and Ajol
otes were extremely plentiful.
Now, there are more Ajolotes in captivity for medical research
than living in the wild.
The legend goes that when there are no more Ajolotes,
the world will end.
There are currently estimated to be between 50 and 1,000 wild
Ajolotes.
There are entities that we are in relation to on this earth
that can't express their consent with language.
They only register their distress.
Protocols scale how we relate to each other.
The GERM protocol scales the granting and withdrawal of consent
in relationships with humans and with robots.
As we continue to rebuild the world through technology, let's never
skip the hard work of negotiating consent in all of our relationships.
Because even if people can leave our apps, if they don't
like them, which we talk about a lot in At Proto,
we want them to keep choosing At Proto.
So let's use our interacting protocols to build a future that
is truly free, because we are all exactly where we want to
be.
Thank you.
And I did want to hold like
a few minutes for Q&A,
so if anybody has any, hit me up.
Yeah, Gov.
Hang on just a sec.
We've got folks streaming in, so I'll bring you a
mic.
Thank you.
So, well, thank you very much.
And I also sent my first GERM DM, like, right
now, so.
As you all should, right now.
As you all should.
But, so with E2EE, and also in the context of
consent, there's always a tension between privacy and safety, from a
security perspective.
And I'm curious what your approach, or GERM's
approach, is towards that, perhaps in the context of moderation.
Yeah, pretty much that's my question.
At GERM, we have a user-centric view of safety.
So it's all about people being empowered to be in places
that they want to be, and consent is really central to that.
And on a kind of organizational level, we have a sense that
we're going to build and ship safety features along with the
connective features that we ship.
So the GERM that many of you are using today
is a one-on-one messenger.
We haven't shipped photos yet, also for safety reasons, because there
's tooling that we need to ship once we let people share
photos.
There's tooling that we need to ship also when we let
you share link previews, which we all want link previews.
I've been thinking about that a lot this weekend.
It's also why we haven't shipped open DMs yet.
A lot of people have been asking for DMs.
So we have a lot to build.
We don't want to put the cart before the horse.
We want to make sure that anywhere that people are, they are
able to get help if they need it.
We also think about scale when we think about safety.
So we think that people have a right to community, but they
don't have a right to reach and, like, extensive publishing.
So when we envision GERM serving extra large groups, we
imagine that perhaps, like, an automated moderation service that will be required
to be an end in your group.
But that's not something that will require in small-scale groups,
like 20-person groups.
And, you know, even though we're innovating a lot in
terms of the protocol and the identity layer, we are building on
top of 10, 15 years of end-to-end encrypted messaging.
Billions of people are using end-to-end encrypted messaging every
day around the world in iMessage and WhatsApp.
And so there are a lot of best practices there for us
to build on.
Thanks.
Here you go.
Thank you.
What are the requirements for implementing GERM DMs into
your app view?
We have them written up.
There's links to them right on our blog, germnetwork.
com slash blog.
You should ask Anna.
Anna, can you raise your hand?
Show the people.
Ask Anna's my founding engineer.
What are the requirements?
Okay.
It's complicated.
I mean, from a user experience level today, we're just on
iOS.
So you're going to want to have an app or a
web product that people are using, at least on their iPhone sometimes.
And we have some splash pages and ways for you to direct
folks to information if they're not using an iOS device when
they access.
But it should be pretty easy.
Lots of people have done it, even in the last few weeks,
without our help yet.
So we'd love to help you do that.
Great.
And are there any pretenses on which you would prevent an
app view from implementing GERM DMs, like if they
became, you know, like an abuser of the technology or something
like this?
I think that would be difficult.
That's an interesting trust and safety question.
I think there are ways that we can...
I'm not actually going to answer that.
We should chat about that.
Yeah.
Thank you.
I'll check out the docs.
Thank you very much.
Yeah, please do.
Someone throw me an easy one.
One more, maybe?
What was your favorite part of building on Ad Proto?
All of you.
Excellent.
No, but to say it, like, more actually, more directly, it's
kind of ironic when you're building, like, a consumer product to
build something that's designed to have a cold start problem on
purpose.
Because the whole point of GERM is that you can
be alone if you want to, and you control the aperture of
how available you want to be.
So somebody might use GERM and only ever want to
talk to three people in their entire lives, but one of the
three people that they're talking to might want to talk to
50,000 people.
And that's an affordance that we make possible that the
meta products of the world make simply impossible.
And I think the last six months for us, as we've
integrated with Ad Proto, has been about giving you a new
aperture and a new set of invitations that you can use
to bring your friends into GERM.
And just seeing those GERM buttons pop up all over
your profiles and seeing people use this to have private conversations from
their internet friends has been extremely thrilling.
So thank you for that.
Thank you so much, Tessa.
I think we're going to wrap up questions now, and we
've got a panel discussion, so everybody stick around.
The team from Expo and Friends is going to be talking
about building apps on Expo and at Proto.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Tessa.